---
layout: post
title:  Coffee Log 28
tags:
  - coffee
categories:
  - coffee-log
---

Good morning dear reader. This has been a long time coming. Welcome
back to the Coffee Log.

<!-- MORE -->

I apologize (both to you and myself) for my unexpected March hiatus.
Two weeks of the month I spent living out of a backpack in
California: the first for NVIDIA's [GTC<i class="fa
fa-external-link"></i>][gtc]{:target="_blank"} 2019, the second to
spend time with family.

[gtc]: https://www.nvidia.com/en-us/gtc

Today I'll be reporting on Trader Joe's [*French Vanilla
Coffee*][coffee]{:target="_blank"}, depicted below. It's from an
Arabica bean, pre-ground to a medium-fine grain, with a medium-light
roast.  Brewing took 3:30".

[coffee]: https://www.amazon.com/Trader-Joes-French-Vanilla-Coffee/dp/B00JCFLFXK

![French Vanilla Coffee](/assets/images/french_vanilla.jpg)

The first thing you'll notice about this coffee, even before you
finish brewing, is the intense smell of vanilla. Fortunately, this
character is mainly limited to the aroma; the decidedly bitter flavor
of concentrated vanilla is absent from the coffee (and what
bitterness we do taste can be traced back to the bean itself).
Instead, the familiar earthiness of the Arabica shines through,
merely bookended by the pleasant aroma of vanilla, rather than
dominated by its flavor.

The slightly finer grind left me with a little more coffee dust at
the bottom of my mug than I would have liked, and likely also left me
with just an *ever so slightly* more bitter and intense body than I
think suits this roast. I'll have to keep my eyes open for a
whole-bean or coarser-ground variety. Nonetheless, I still enjoy
drinking this coffee, and the extra aromatic dimension added by the
vanilla keeps things interesting every morning. I rate this cup a
**7.25**/10.

Stay tuned in the coming weeks for my coverage of Trader Joe's
[Bolivian Blend<i class="fa
fa-external-link"></i>][bolivian]{:target="_blank"}. Also be advised
that the next installment of *How We Tricked Rocks Into Thinking* is
on the way (but may be further delayed by my April travel schedule).

[bolivian]: https://www.amazon.com/Trader-Joes-French-Vanilla-Coffee/dp/B00JCFLFXK
