---
layout: post
title:  Coffee Log 29
tags:
  - coffee
categories:
  - coffee-log
---

Welcome back to the Coffee Log. Today we'll be looking at Trader
Joe's [*Organic Sumatra Coffee*<i class="fa
fa-external-link"></i>][tj]. I don't remember the last time I
reviewed an Indonesian coffee in the series, so it's possible this is
the first!

[tj]:

<!-- MORE -->

![Trader Joe's Organic Sumatra Coffee](???)
{% include caption.html
    text="Trader Joe's Organic Sumatra Coffee"
    href="???" %}

T-Joe's Sumatra coffee is a medium-dark roast with 100% Arabica
beans. I chose a somewhat medium-grained grind, somewhere in the
"auto-drip" region of the dial. I unfortunately don't have the
timings for brewing the cup in my Bialetti [Moka Express<i class="fa
fa-external-link"></i>][moka], but I should note that all future
timings shouldn't be compared to installment 28 or prior, as I'm on a
new stove in a new apartment now.

[moka]:

The brew spills into the top chamber of the Express a dark, rich,
almost red shade before pooling into the familiar dark, earthy brown
of a cup of black coffee. My nose is a little blocked this morning,
but from what I can tell, the brew is giving off a mild, nearly sweet
aroma; very pleasant.

In describing the actual flavor of the coffee, I think the label
actually gets it pretty spot on: smooth with earthy notes. To that
first point, this is one of the least bitter cups of coffee I've had
in recent memory; it's very well balanced in terms of acidity. To the
second, I've always had some trouble with the adjective "earthy,"
it's really hard to put my finger on the specific characteristics
that make a coffee, beer, wine, etc. "earthy." But this cup fits the
bill. Something about it tastes earthy (in a good way, not in a
drinking dirt way). Maybe that's just the power of suggestion from
the label, who knows.

I really dig the mellowness of this bean and roast, and that
well-balanced acidity is one of the big things I look for in a great
cup of coffee. **9.25**/10. I'm withholding the perfect 10 because I'd
like to see if a lighter roast could ever achieve the qualities I
picked up on this morning, and because I think I got the grind just
one level too fine.

Things to look forward to in the near future of the Coffee Log:

- If I remember, I'll edit this post with the brew timings for the
  Sumatra Coffee from today's post
- One of my roommates now has a coffee grinder which I'll be making
  liberal use of in the imminent future (once I finish this container
  of Sumatra, which I ground at the store)
